First part


SOVIET POWER DOWN

From the Soviet Information Bureau
Evening message
September 21, 1941

During September 21, our troops fought with
adversary on the whole front. After days,
fierce fighting, our troops left Kiev. *)

*) Pravda, September 22, 1941 Kiev was surrendered on September 19, and not on September 21, as the summary reports.

I saw them running and I realized that this was the end. The Red Army soldiers — in their protective, burnt form, alone with rolling, others already without guns — rarely ran across yards, through gardens, jumping fences.
Then they said that they ran into houses, begged to give civilian clothes, and the women, gave some rags as soon as possible, they changed clothes, hoping to hide, and the women, drowned in the cesspools the useless weapons and tunics with insignia.
It became very quiet. There were battles for many days, a cannonade rattled, sirens sounded, the bombings were one after another, at night the whole horizon was lit up with lights and glows, we slept on nodes in a trench, the earth shook and fell on our heads.
And now it became quiet - that silence that seems worse than any shooting. And it was not known where we are: still under Stalin, already under Hitler, or in a narrow lane in the middle?
From the railway embankment clearly and closely combed a machine gun. Small sprigs and leaves fell from the old elm tree over the trench. I slammed the hatch and collapsed into the pit where the grandfather hissed at me and gave it to my ear.
Our trench, dug in the garden, was a typical anti-aircraft defense — a “slot” — those times: in the shape of the letter T, two meters deep, seventy centimeters wide. Yards, squares and streets were dug up with such slots, the Soviet radio urged them to dig and explain how.
But my grandfather and I worked for several days, improving the scheme. We covered the earthen walls with boards, laid the floor with pieces of brick, and made a covering on top. Of course, we didn’t have logs to make three rolls, but we plowed one and a half meter wood dies over the trench and generally piled on top of all the wood that was found in the shed.
My grandfather reasoned like this: if a bomb falls on a trench, it means that it will shake into this firewood, the logs will scatter like billiard balls, and the explosion will not reach us: where should it, mean, destroy such a fortress!
For strength, we still threw earth on the firewood, to enclose it with turf for disguise, so it turned out to be an impressive and brightly noticeable hill, under which, if we lower the entrance hatch, it was dull and dark, like in a grave.
Our happiness that nothing has exploded in the vicinity and has not hit even a decent shard, otherwise all this firewood would have collapsed on our heads. But then we did not know this yet, we were proud of our hands and were sure that we were sitting in excellent security.
Before, until we had such a good bomb shelter, my grandfather and grandmother and I hid from bombs under the bed.
The bed was old, solid, with backs of sheet iron, on which paintings were painted with oil paints: mills, lakes with swans and castles. We thought this: if the bomb falls, it will pierce the roof, the ceiling, jump on the spring mattress with a feather bed, break, and the feather bed and even two wadded blankets will not allow fragments to pass through.
In order not to lie on the bare floor, the grandmother laid down a blanket and under the bed, put down the pillows, so it turned out very cozy.
And when the shooting started and the windows were itched by the howl of the bombers, the grandfather threw himself under the bed first. He rolled away and pressed against the wall. Behind him rolled head over heels and I pressed against him. And the grandmother, always hesitating at the stove, grabbed the cat Titus, lay down on the edge, covering us all with us, and so we saved ourselves.
Grandfather whispered prayers and swore at me:
- From, hubbub, what are you spinning like a worm sitting in you?
Having completed the construction of our powerful trench, we began to run into it in the same sequence, only the grandmother always ran with pillows and a blanket (she did not leave them in the trench so as not to cheer).
Titus is used to war; at the very first shots, with his tail held up, in great leaps he rushed straight to the hatchway into the trench and meowed with flour in his eyes so that he could be lowered. Because he could only climb on a steep ladder, but did not learn to descend.
I still do not know what this word is - hubbub. Grandfather died, I forgot to ask him. And the worm of inquisitiveness tormented me always. I stuck out to look at the planes and see terrible crosses on them, tried to see how the bombs were torn.
But when the Red Army soldiers ran and it became clear that this was the end, I was scared to see it, really, finally, scary.
A kerosene lamp was burning in the trench, it smelled like chad. Mother (she had been on duty at her school for days and nights) sat on a stool with horror in her eyes. Grandfather ate - he always ate with us when he was worried. His gray beard, divided into two wedges, moved abruptly because, because of the false teeth, he did not chew, but “zamkal”, as his grandmother said, and crumbs fell into his beard. Grandma barely heard the prayer, baptizing before the icon of the Mother of God, which brought here. I myself hammered the carnations into the board to hang; I liked this icon; of all the grandmother's icons, it was my favorite.
And in the walls behind the boards something rustled softly, fumbled: there they lived their personal lives, absolutely indifferent to war, beetles and worms, and active ants.
The earth finally stopped shuddering and falling from the ceiling. And in this terrible silence it seemed that something terrible, some unthinkable explosion was about to happen.
I sat, barely breathing, waiting for this explosion ...
Suddenly there was a deaf tramp, the hatch rose, and a neighbor, Elena Pavlovna, excited, not like herself, shouted with joyful amazement, with triumph:
- What are you sitting? The Germans have come! Soviet power is over!
I was twelve years old. A lot of things happened in my life for the first time. The Germans also came for the first time. First of all I flew out of the trench, closed my eyes from the bright light and noted that the world had become something different - like good weather after the storm - although outwardly it seemed that everything remained the same.
Elena Pavlovna, choking, waving her hands, spoke tenderly, joyfully:
—... young, so young is worth it! .. My windows are on the street. The car was gone, and he, young, pretty, is worth it! ..
I immediately rushed through the yard, took off onto the fence.
At the fence of the square in our Petropavlovskaya Square there was a low, predatory, long-nosed cannon on thick inflated tires. Near her is a really very young, blond, rosy cheeked German soldier in an unusually clean and well-fitting gray-green uniform. He kept his rifle on the weight, noticed that I was looking at him, and became proud. Very cute, proud, so fascinated.
I had a friend of life, three years older than me, Bolik Kaminsky, I will tell you more about him. He was evacuated from the factory factory training school - FZO. So this kid was very similar to my friend Bolik.
You see, I was expecting everything: that the Germans are terrible giants or something, everything is completely on tanks, in gas masks and horned helmets, and I was shocked that this kid is so ordinary, well, nothing special, just like our Bolik.
Zafasonil, yeah, I'd also zafasonil, have such a gun.
At that moment, that incredible explosion that I was waiting for was heard. I choked, hit my chin on the fence, almost fell. But the soldier shamefully sat down and cringed, frightened by hugging the gun.
But you need to give him his due: he immediately came to his senses, independently got up and began to look somewhere over my head. I turned around and saw in the blue sky, behind the tops of the trees, fall, spinning and planning, fragments of boards.
- Oh, blew the same bridge, damn tramps! Uh Said the grandfather, walking up to the fence and sticking his nose out so that he could also look at the first German. - Fyu fyu, that's it! .. Well, where are we going to fight Stalin with them, God forgive me. This is the army! This is not our uncommon - hungry and barefoot. Look at how he is dressed!
Indeed, the soldier was dressed perfectly. On newspaper caricatures and in Soviet films, the Germans were depicted as tattered tramps and bandits, and the Soviet soldiers were always beautiful, taut, rosy cheeked.
The raising of dust, an angular, square and carnivorous car flew up, turned around famously (my grandfather and I watched eagerly), and the same smart, nimble as jugglers, young German guys hitched a cannon in one moment, jumped up on the steps and, hanging on both sides cars, famously rushed off towards Hem.
“Yeah ...” said the shocked grandfather and crossed over widely; - Glory to you. My God, this unruly power ended, and I thought I would not live ... Go, help carry things to the hut: everything is damp in the pit. We will live now.
I didn’t quite willingly slunk off to the trench. There, my mother handed knots, suitcases, and stools from a dark hole, the grandmother accepted and folded, and I began to carry them.
So many times in recent times we have been repeating this thing: in the trench, from the trench, down, up, even if there was something decent to hide, and then only clothes on clothes, some kind of czarist times, in patches, eaten, trousers wiped , pillows ... In general, the occupation is not for men.
The head of my second life friend, Shura Matza, poked out from behind the fence. Making huge eyes, he shouted:
- The Germans are on the tram line! Let's go
And I was blown away like a wind.

The whole Kirillov Street (it was called Frunze Street under the Soviet regime, but the name was not inculcated) was, as far as it can be seen at both ends, crammed with cars and carts. The cars were angular, with all sorts of projections, grilles, brackets.
Each car has a face, it looks at the world with its headlights indifferently, or angry, or plaintively, or surprised. So these, like the first that took away the gun, looked predatory. I have never seen such cars, and it seemed to me that they are very powerful, they filled the street with roar and smoke.
The bodies of some of the trucks were entire small apartments, with bunks, screwed tables.
The Germans were looking out of cars, walking along the street - clean-shaven, fresh and very funny. You will be fresh and cheerful, if they have infantry, it turns out, did not go, and - went! They laughed for any reason, something jokingly shouted to the first people who were creeping out into the street. Between the wagons with shells and bags, courageous motorcyclists in helmets, with machine guns mounted on the handlebars, walked up and down.
Until now, we have never seen, huge, fiery-red heavy horses, with straw-colored manes, stepping slowly and importantly with shaggy legs drawn by sixes, pulling the guns as if playfully. Our small Russian horses, mortified and half-dead, on which the Red Army retreated, would have seemed like foals next to these giants.
In the dazzling white and black limousines were riding, chatting merrily, officers in high cases with silver. Shurka and I ran our eyes and caught our breath. We ventured to run across the street. The pavement quickly filled up, people ran from all sides, and all of them, like us, looked at this armada shocked, began to smile at the Germans, in response and try to talk to them.
And the Germans, almost all, had phrasebooks, they looked through them and screamed at the girls on the sidewalk:
- Panenka, The girls! Bolshovik - konets. POA!
“Ukraine,” the girls corrected laughing.
- Yeah, yeah! U-end-ina! Peddith spit on bitter!
The girls giggled, confused, and everyone around them laughed and smiled.
From Bondarsky Lane some kind of movement was formed: it was evident how heads were floating solemnly, and a procession of old men and women came out.
The front old man, with a towel over his shoulder, ca