First part


Soviet power ended

From the Soviet Informbureau 
Evening Message 
September 21, 1941

During the 21st of September our troops were fighting with 
Enemy on the whole front. After a multi-day, 
Fierce fights our troops left Kiev. *)

*) "Pravda", September 22, 1941 Kiev was delivered on September 19, not September 21, according to the summary.

I saw them running and realized that it was the end. Red Army men-in their protective, burnt form, alone with the slopes, other already and without guns-rarely ran through the yards, in the garden, jump over the fences.
They said afterwards that they had run into the houses, begged to give a regular dress, and the women, gave them some rags, they were dressed up, hoping to hide, and the women, drowned in the pit pits useless weapons and gymnasts with insignia.
It became very quiet. Many days were fighting, rattled the canon, Vyli sirens, bombs were one after another, at night the entire horizon lit up with the Zarzami and glow, we slept on the knots in the trenches, the earth shook and fell on our heads.
And then it became quiet-that silence, which seems scarier than any shooting. And it was not known where we are: Still under Stalin, already under Hitler, or on a narrow strip in the middle?
With the railway embankment clearly and closely chesanul machine gun. From the old elm over the trench fell down small twigs and leaves. I threw a hatch and hit into the pit where my grandfather hissed at me and gave it to his ear.
Our trench dug in the garden was a typical air protection — the "slit" — those times: in the form of the letter "T", two meters deep, centimeters seventy wide. Such cracks were yards, squares and streets, Soviet radio called them to dig and explained how.
But my grandfather and I worked for a few days, improving the scheme. Earthen walls we have sewed up boards, a floor have laid out pieces of a brick, and from above have made a covering. We, of course, had no logs to make three Nakata, but we have wet over the trench of the half-metre wood dies and in general have put on top all firewood which only were found in a shed.
Grandfather reasoned like this: If a bomb falls on the trench, it means that it will be shaharnet in these firewood, the logs will scatter like billiard balls, and we won't get a blast: where he, dastardly, destroy such a fortress!
For durability we have already thrown on wood of a land, for a disguise have imposed turf, so it has turned out an impressive and brightly marked hill under which, if to lower an entrance hatch, it was deaf and dark, as in a tomb.
Our happiness that there was nothing nearby exploded and did not get at least a decent shard, and then all these firewood so would have collapsed on our heads. But then we did not know it yet, were proud of their hands and were sure that we are sitting in great safety.
Before we had such a good bomb shelter, my grandfather and grandmother were hiding from the bombs under the bed.
The bed was old, solid, with the backs of sheet iron, on which were painted oil paints paintings: mills, lakes with swans and castles. We thought: If the bomb falls, it will break the roof, the ceiling, jump on a spring mattress with a railing, burst, and the feather and two more cotton blankets fragments, of course, will not miss.
In order not to lie on the ground floor, the grandmother has placed and under a bed a blanket, has put pillows, so it came out very comfortably.
And when the shooting began and the glass was itching from the howling of the bombers, the grandfather would throw himself under the bed first. He rolled away and clung to the wall. I was followed by a kubrem and clung to him. And the grandmother, always hesitating at the stove, took the cat Titus, lied to the edge, closing all of us, and so we were saved.
The grandfather whispered prayers and swore in my address:
"From, Gomon, why are you spinning like a worm is sitting in you?"
Having finished construction of our powerful trench, we began to run in it in the same sequence, only the grandmother always ran with pillows and a blanket (it in a trench did not leave, that did not damp).
Cat Titus used to war; At the first shots, having zadrav a tail, huge jumps have carried directly to a hatch in a trench and with a flour in eyes mehukal that it have lowered. Because on the steep staircase he could only crawl out, and did not learn to descend.
I still don't know what the word is, Gomon. My grandfather died, I forgot to ask him. And the worm of curiosity always tormented me. I was sticking out to see the planes and seeing them with creepy crosses, trying to make out how the bombs were torn.
But when the Red Army ran and it became clear that it was the end, I was afraid to see it, really, finally, scary.
The kerosene lamp was burning in the trench, it smelled of tea. The mother (before that she was in her school for days and nights) sat on a stool with horror in her eyes. Grandfather ate-he always ate when he was worried. His gray beard, divided into two wedge-like, abruptly moved, because because of the inserted jaws, he did not chew, and "Jamkal", as the grandmother said, and crumbs raining down him in the beard. Babka could hardly hear her praying, baptizing before the icon of the mother of God brought here. I myself hammered into the board a carnation to hang; I liked this icon, of all the babkish icons, it was my favorite.
And in the walls behind the boards something quietly Shurshalo, was: there lived their personal life, absolutely indifferent to war, beetles and worms, and active ants.
The Earth finally ceased to wince and to pour from the ceiling. And in this eerie silence it seemed that there was going to happen something terrible, some unthinkable explosion.
I sat, barely breathing, waiting for this explosion...
Suddenly there was a dull stomping, the hatch rose, and Elena Pavlovna's neighbor, excited, on herself not resembling, cried with joyful amazement, with a triumph:
What are you sitting on? The Germans are here! Soviet power was over!
I was twelve years old. A lot of things happened for me in my life for the first time. The Germans came for the first time. I first flew out of the trenches, lit up from the bright light and noted that the world had become something different-like the good weather after the storm-although outwardly as if everything remained still.
Elena Pavlovna, choking, waving her hands, spoke with emotion, joyfully:
—... Young, so young is worth!.. My windows are on the street. The car is gone, and he, young, pretty, worth!..
I immediately jerked through the yard, took off on the fence.
Near the fence of the park on our Peter and Paul Square was a low, predatory, long-legged gun on thick inflated tires. Near her-really very young, blond, pink-haired German soldier in an unusually clean and well sitting on it gray-green form. He kept the rifle on the weight, noticed that I was looking at it, and got tanned. Very nice sunlit so, Fazozil.
I had a friend of my life, three years older than me, bolic Kaminsky, I will tell about it again. He was evacuated from the school of factory-factory training-Fzo. So this kid was very similar to my friend Bolica.
You see, I expected everything: that the Germans-scary giants, that is, all entirely on the tanks, in the masks and horned helmets, and I was shocked that this kid is so ordinary, well, nothing special, just like our bolk.
I'm going to get a gun, too, too.
At this point, the most incredible explosion I've been waiting for. I choked, hit the chin on the fence, almost fell. And the soldier was shamebed and cowering, terrified of the cannon.
But it is necessary to give it due: it immediately came to mind, independently got up and began to look somewhere on top of my head. I turned around and saw, as in the blue sky, behind the tops of trees, fall, spinning and planning, wrecks of boards.
"Ah, blew the bridge, damned Boski! Uh! Grandfather said, approaching the fence and sticking his nose to look the first German. "Fyu-Fyu, yes!.. Well, I'm sorry about Stalin. This is the army! These are not our private, hungry and barefoot. Look how he's dressed!
Indeed, the soldier was dressed excellently. On the newspaper cartoons and in Soviet films of Germans portrayed Ragged tramps and bandits, and Soviet soldiers were always beautiful, toned, rosy-cheekkie.
Sighing dust, flew angular, square and predatory car, famously unfolded (we eagerly looked at the grandfather), and the same toned, dexterly, as magicians, young guys-Germans have trailed a gun in an instant, have jumped on footboards and, hanging on both parties of the machine, Famously raced towards Podol.
"Yes..." said the shocked grandfather, and crossed himself widely; "Glory to you." God, this Bossyatska power has ended, and I thought I would not live... Go, help to carry things in a hut: in a pit all has been damp. We'll live now.
I didn't quite willingly go to the trenches. There my mother was feeding from a dark hole knots, suitcases, stools, Babka took and folded in a heap, and I began to wear.
So many times in recent times we have repeated this case: in a trench, from a trench, downwards, upwards, at least there was that decent to hide, and then some shmotki on Shmotkah, some casing of imperial times, in patches, a moth eaten, trousers overpriced, pillows... In general, the occupation is not for a man.
Because of the fence leaned out the head of my second friend's life-Shurki Matsy. Making huge eyes, he cried out:
-The Germans are coming on the tram line! Let's go!
And I was blown away by the wind.

The whole Kirillovskaya Street (under Soviet rule it was called Frunze Street, but the name was not instilled), was, as it is visible in both ends, crammed with cars and carts. Cars were angular, with all kinds of ledges, lattices, Skami.
Each machine has a face, it looks at the world with its headlights indifferent, or angry, or plainly, or surprised. So these, like the first that took away the gun, looked predatory. I have not seen such cars, and it seemed to me that they were very powerful, they filled the street with a roar and smoke.
Bodies of some trucks were whole small apartments, with beds, screwed tables.
The Germans were looking out of cars, walking down the street-clean shaven, fresh and very cheerful. You will be fresh and cheerful, if they have infantry, it turns out, did not go, and-rode! They laughed at any occasion, and jokingly shouted at the first people crawling out into the street. Between the furs with shells and sacks, the brave motorcyclists in helmets, with the reinforced machine guns, were in the shoes.
Hitherto unseen, huge, fiery-red horses-heavy-duty, with mushrooms straw color, slow and important stepping shaggy legs, horse six, pulled guns, as if playing. Our gnomes Russian Loshadenki, disfigured and half-dead, on which the Red Army retreated, would appear as Colts next to these giants.
In dazzling white and black limousines rode, cheerfully conversing, officers in high cartuas with silver. With Shurka and I ran away our eyes and took breath. We dared to run across the street. The sidewalk quickly filled, people fled from all sides, and all of them, like us, looked at this armada shocked, began to smile to the Germans, in response and try to talk to them.
And the Germans, almost everyone, had a book-phrasebook, they lied them and shouted to the girls on the sidewalk:
"Panenka, Devushka!" Bolshovik-Konetz. In Ukraine!
-Ukraine,-laughing, straightened girls.
"Ya, ya! U-Edge-ina! It's a bit of a walk.
The girls giggled, embarrassed, and all around laughed and smiled.
From the Bondarskogo Alley formed some movement: it was seen, as solemnly floated heads, and a procession of old and old. 
Front old man, with a towel over his shoulder, carried on a tray round Ukrainian bread with a salt-shaker on it. The crowd knocked on the spectacle, pushed.
The old men were late and confused: Who should be handed?
The front moved to the nearest white limousine, from where, smiling, the officers looked, and with a bow he lodged a tray. Shurka and I lost each other. I struggled to squeeze. There was something to say, a laugh, and the rear asked, "What did he say? What did he say? "but the convoy moved on, I only saw the officer passing the bread and a towel in the back seat in the car.
Around began to say that somewhere here the Germans shouted: "Butter, roll!"-and threw directly on the tram line box with oil and baskets of bullets-take, say, who want. I noticed, trying to figure out where it was, and ran to the bridge over Vyshgorodskaya Street.
The bridge did not have oil and a bullock, but there was a fire. The corner brick house was burning quietly and lazily, set on fire in the window. The fence had already piled directly on the flowers that had grown at home, and they were trampled on. Two women and a girl with shovels dug the ground and threw on fire because there was no water. From the crowd of the yawn came a man, took a stick and began to mercilessly beat the glass in the window.
The German jumped off the car, took aim of the camera, crouched and bent, shooting the fire large and common plan.
The man climbed out the window and began to serve the women chairs, drawers with linen from the closet, embroidered coats and dresses, and all praised him, and I also thought: what a good Fellow!
The troops continued to take a cloud from under the bridge. The sun was shining brightly, there was no palbe-only roar of motors, rumbling of wheels, voices, laughter. After a long sitting in the pit, I was all over the place; Reeling, saunbled home to report.
And in our yard stood a gray-green soldier with a gun over his shoulder and with a rope in his hands-a simple one, with white eyelashes and red forehead, looked indifferently on the sides, and grandfather, gesturing, invited him to the barn:
"There are prostrate, prostrate, prostrate, and there, perhaps, the East! We have to see, bitte. The soldier reluctantly went to the Saraychik.
"They are looking for prisoners," said the grandmother from the porch.
In the barn there was a hatch in the cellar. The soldier began to show his hands:
"Spitky, Pshishky.
gave him matches. He lighted and cautiously peered into the hole.
Partisans! The grandmother said loudly and ironically.
The soldier jumped away like a stung, with a head and a suspiciously looking at us all.
"I am afraid," said Babka, ' Ides, Ydy, not boxia. ' NET Partisans.
But the soldier said something dissatisfied, in the cellar did not want to climb, and strictly showed the grandfather on the Red House flag, which we on holidays were to hang out on the gate.
This.
"Yes, yes," the grandfather shoved himself, took the flag, and tore off the shaft. Martha, hurry to the stove. And the stick is good, the broom will go.
Another soldier came, too, with a rope, excitedly clanged first, and they ran. Grandma beckoned me to the hay.
"On, fly to Cherdak, shove there, in a newspaper Kazyu-Nyany completed.
What the heck is he, grandma?
"Nobody knows anything, son... And the Germans have red flags, they are told to cling-again buy a new matter. Do it, son, as I say.
I got it. Climbed into the attic, snuck in a Plusansky in the far corner, Zatlyzlyat the bundle under the beam, and when, having gone to the web, descended, Granny stood in the gate with Elena Pavlovna and called:
Old! Go quickly, guerrilla lead.
Our red-haired soldier led along the street of a hefty dirty boar, sweeping his rope across the trunk, another customized twig, and there were other soldiers around the bunch, satisfied golgotali.
Making big eyes and Ahaya, Elena Pavlovna told that soldiers are not looking for prisoners, but... Rob. And Kamelskih took a boar, and the shrouds are dragged, and she looked in the closet, under the bed, removed from pillows pillowcases and for some reason towel with cloves. The neighbor did not want to give the boar, so they left a receipt, saying: «An officer Pay». We are lucky, if we have not taken anything, maybe because the grandfather spoke German words, they were fasting.
Grandfather looked anxiously after a courageous armed procession with bondage.
"Well," he said sternly, "Let us carry things back to the trenches. Shaking his mother, I forgot, it is their right to the winner: three days to rob everything they want!
I came out of the food, I saw a bag of salt from the grocery, but while I was running, there was only paper and empty drawers.
I was ready to bury, I was not greedy, my grandmother was so educated, polite granddaughter, and suddenly this robbery captured me as a hot avalanche, my throat squeezed from greed and excitement.
And, most importantly, I understood that it was a unique, rare case-so rich, so great, so with impunity to rob. I missed it, I was late for a little bit!.. Which means no experience. "Well, come on," I thought, comforting myself. "It's the next time..." And when will it be, this next time?..
Gathered with grief on the counters weights from the scales and carried all the good home.
From the windows, people looked out of the gate. Neighbor Pavel Sotava on the whole street ironically said:
But Tolya was rewarded. Go tell your mother to get you out of it.
I was like a cold water. I so proudly carried my lamp and brushes, and then quickly rushed into the yard, unloaded in the canopy of prey... Mom gasped:
What the hell is that?
Babka looked, swung her head:
Or do we have a lamp, son? But my grandfather understood and praised me:
Let's Go! Good job! The Bolsheviks themselves at the people robbed all the same and sold, it is ours. Oh, I didn't know, I did, oh, I did! 
Shatkovsky won Paul-"deli" delivered, a barrel of sunflower oil rolled. What a case! And then only we are robbed.
It turns out, while I was on the bazaar, six soldiers came, demanded: "Jajka, mountain Desert ecosystems!"-have climbed everywhere, as at home, have taken away potatoes, cabbage, tomatoes...
Well, damn it, look what's going on in the world: some of them are being robbed, others are here. Case!
I was still shaking with excitement and Podshduvala Dedova praise, I ran to call Shurku Masu, we two went back to the bazaar. It was already empty. As we did not fumble-nothing like a broom swept, shops strewn only with paper, straw and glass. In the shoe we climbed into the cashier, began to twist the handle. They took their cheques for thousands of rubles, went out, scattered them on the street and, already indifferent, watched as the city all enter and enter the troops.
There were tractors, ATVs, rode columns of soldiers on bicycles and roaders on simple carts. Those that entered and housed, wore knots with junk, turned over the shoulder of fur coats.
The wind went up, chased the straw and the paper, carried the smoke from the cars, the troops were all going, there was a cloud, and there was no end to them, and all regularly, like locusts, were taken to drag something. Quiet such, like normal, mundane robbery... It was Friday, September 19, 1941.


So, we are in this new life



Kiev in the hands of German troops

Main apartment of the Führer on September 20 
Supreme command 
Of the German armed Forces informs:

Along with the operations on the surrounding Soviet armies in the east was launched an attack on the capital of Ukraine-Kiev. After the courageous breakthrough of strong fortifications on the West Bank of the Dnieper, our troops entered the city. The German military flag is waving over the citadel of Kyiv from today morning.
Offensive operations on the east from the Dnieper uncontrollably go forward. In the battles for the strengthening of Leningrad have major successes... *
*) "Ukraïnske word", September 21, 1941 newspaper in Ukrainian, published by the occupation authorities.

The newspaper "Ukrainian word" by the time of the Germans took Kiev was the fifteenth number, printing first in Zhitomir. Its not that sold, not that handed out on streets triumphant enthusiasts, this grandfather has extracted, as sacred has brought and greedily wanted to read.
But in reading the small font, and still on crappy, as if wrapping paper, it was not strong and has reassigned this case to me, myself listened, philosophically thinking. 

I only cite the headlines from this newspaper:

Kiev in the hands of German troops Poltava occupied
Outstanding successes under Leningrad 
Occupation of further territories under Leningrad 
100,000 the KGR. Bombs dropped on the port of Odessa giant achievements of German troops in the battle on the bridgehead of the lower reaches of the Dnieper 
Struggle of the Ukrainian people 
Art growth in Zhytomyr 
Revival of the church at Kholmshchyna "Kiev", a poem by Yakov Nagornyy.
... Here I will make a traditional retreat and at least in the most cursory way tell about our small family: who we were, what and why.
I myself can not stand in the books of such a retreat, skip them, and if you my retreat seems uninteresting, you also safely miss him, because the main thing in this book-much farther.
But if you wonder how a man dreams of Hitler, read at least about my grandfather.
Semilik Fyodor Vlasovich, my grandfather, hated the Soviet power with all his soul and passionately waited for the Germans as the deliverer, believing that there could be nothing worse than the Soviet power in the world.
No, he was not a fascist or a monarchist, a nationalist or a trotskist, red or white, he did not wash the hell out of it at all.
By origin he was from the Ukrainian serfs, peasant-poor. Social status-a city worker with a long experience. And in its essence-the simplest, small, hungry, intimidated inhabitant of the country of Soviets, which he-stepmother.
Grandfather was born in 1870 year-in one year with Lenin, but on this common has ended between them. The grandfather could not hear the name of Lenin, though he died long ago, as many Lentsy died or were beaten. He believed that it was from Lenin all the troubles that he "played in Russia as a roulette, all lost and died."
When he said that, the grandmother looked around in horror and defiantly shouted in the yard:
Stop grinding, Malholon. The good people die, and you, the parasite, all live.
His grandfather was born and raised in the village Shenderovka Kanevsky County, in a desperate village family with eleven children, who lived, according to him, in a half-ruined kurene.
He spent his youth in the Battle of German colonists in the Kherson region, leaving his family forever. After serving in the soldiers, went to work in Kiev, loitering in search of a job, was a janitor at the general, married a sling, went on the tram conductor and all dreamed of his house and prosperity: so you can have enough to be filled and not think about tomorrow-that was the limit His dreams.
They were starving with grandmother, cold, folding penny to the Kopeck, killed their youth, but finally bought a tiny piece of the swamp on Kurenevka, drained it themselves, built a hut for a long time-and there was a revolution.
She did not bring goodness, only a new famine, fear, and completely took away the dream. Beautiful words of the Bolsheviks about earthly race in the misty future grandfather did not believe. He was a practitioner.
For many years then his grandfather worked in a shoe factory № 4 mechanic-canalizer, in a smelly robe climbed with the keys to the pipes, the machine was in a working class, which has nowhere else. And all these years he has not ceased to hate the power of "these bosks and murderers" and "No, not Masters".
His former peasant, in the final horror led collectivization with its collective farms, which caused an unprecedented famine. Construction of plants, noisy painted in those years dneproges, conquest of the North Pole there or the sky-was a grandfather resolutely "to a light bulb".
The North Pole has won, but when the grandfather with a grandmother have got, at last, the Rainbow dream-a cow, it was nothing to feed. The queues for the feed were like a cloud. Near the hut, behind the railway embankment a huge rich meadow disappears, and the mouth is impossible. No matter how old his grandfather was, he did not want to get hay! He was digging with a sack and a sickle over babyhim and Revyhowa Yaram, carefully cut the grass under the fences. He did not drink milk-he sent a grandmother to sell to the bazaar. He remembered that the German man had a cow, who gave three buckets of milk a day, and thought that if we were to feed our bald-colored Lyska, she might also give so much.
In general, he was a great combinator. And from constant failures, convulsively poverty the opponent became and envious unusually. Envied half Kurenevka, especially those who had a good vegetable garden and who could carry baskets to the bazaar radish. Kurenevka has been rescued by radishes, as well as by pigs and chickens, deaf to all kinds of sciences, arts or politics, or rather demanding in the politics of one thing: to be allowed to sell radish. 

Gorky has a song in "Childhood":
One beggar hung the portsy to dry, 
And the other beggar stole it. 

So my grandfather was envious. But he could not reach the authentic Kurenevskih "Kurkuley": The garden could be measured by palms, strips of steps in eight widths, the hut and the Saraychik. Behind the fence were the beds of a collective garden farm. One night the grandfather dug out new pits and took a fence for half a meter, stealing from gardeners meters of five square of land, and indifferent collective farm bosses did not notice it! The grandfather was in a great mood for a week and was triumphant, building plans, as in a few years he will again move the fence to half a meter.
To old age, he became terribly absurd, secretly broke the neighboring pears, Sveshivavshiesja through the fence to "his land", killed a stick of neighboring chickens, if they slaughtered us, and so he slept with the whole street.
When he was splashing saliva, he was heard before the bazaar: "U-Tu-Tu-tu!"-and he was nicknamed "seven-true-Tu-tu-tri-buckets-milk."
The grandfather did not drink vodka from a whine, did not smoke, in a cinema did not go, on a tram tried to pass a hare, trousers and jackets donashival to that they have sunk and crept on it. If on the street rode who with the hay and lost his flock, the grandfather was the first to find himself on the pavement, diligently rattled the wand and carried home with a celebration.
The cow did not justify itself, had to sell. 
The grandfather on a test has got ducks, we with it went on a pond, bultyhuchem there with a basket, collecting "duckweed", to feed them, yes on a row of ducks have grown bony, molish.
The grandfather has switched on chickens: those, supposedly, go, are grebuvajut and get to itself a livelihood. Chickens with hunger plucked seedlings in the garden, and carried did not want. I got pigs to keep leftovers and pee. Pigs at the grandfather grew longlegged, muscular, toasted, as hounds dogs. And just before the arrival of the Germans both pigs fell sick and died. I had to bury it.
Very energetic was a grandfather, fought and Toloksya all day from dawn to dark, but could not get rich.
[There were such things around that "lived": Partians, Chekists, thieves, Stupachi, different trade unionists. Rolled in the state cars, the belly of the Caucasian resorts, and received in envelopes secret salaries. Grandfather for his terrible lasagna on Sewer pipes received a monthly salary of half the cost of a simple suit. And he did not have a costume for the rest of his life, he died without ever wearing a suit.
But there were people who looked at the life of the grandfather family as a heavenly blessing. In collective farms around Kiev peasants worked, as under serfdom. No, it's worse. Under serfdom the landowner left them days to work on himself, on his small field. And in the collective farm man did not have such days, as did not have a field. For the exit to work he was put in the statement wand-"work", and in the fall something paid, or maybe not paid, and then paid one penny for the workday.]
So when the guest came, my grandfather had only one topic to talk about: As in the old days was good, and people were fed, and rich, and the Bolsheviks-Boyaki all ruined.
But when in 1937 his friend, old man Beetle, was arrested for a silly anecdote told in the queue, and this beetle immediately disappeared, as drowned, the grandfather scared frightened, closed, and he has only half the subject, that is, as in the old days was good.
I believe he was just as right as he was wrong. This is the most "good"-is known only in comparison. And to my poor grandfather in 1937 Tsarist Russia already seemed to be a fair, lost paradise.
For some reason he did not remember the kureni of his father, who rented a flock of foreign land, but remembered how well the general lived, and how generous he was. What was the price of the Tsar: The coin was worth five kopecks, herring two pennies, and nobody wanted to look at the called.
About his own hatred of the Bolsheviks, he told only God for a long time standing in front of the icons on his knees, and all whispered, whispered, passionately told them something: knew that WHO-who, and God will listen-and not sell.
And soon after the outbreak of war on our roof fell a German flyer and with the morning dew stuck there at the pipe. Grandfather saw the ladder and sent me to get it. With difficulty I took off the unsour leaf, and we began to read.
The leaflet wrote that Germany is called to destroy the Bolsheviks and establishes a new, fair order, when "who does not work-he does not eat", but "everyone who works honestly, gets what he deserves." That life on liberated land is beautiful: Oil costs ten cents a pound, bread-seven cents, herring-three.
His grandfather had eyes on his forehead. It was a message to him personally.
He learned the leaflet by heart, only after that he broke into small pieces. He was seventy-second year, and his dream is to go crazy! -Returned, and may in the meadow will still graze his cow, giving three buckets of milk, and the house will be a supply of food for tomorrow and even after tomorrow, and maybe he even buys himself, finally, the first suit.

Seven (in the Girlhood Dolgoruk) Marfa Efimovna, my grandmother, was born and raised in the village of Deremezna Obukhovskiy County, in the Cursed Halupe, where, as in the grandfather's family, there was nowhere to spit because of children.
[Childhood of the great Ukrainian poet from the fortress of Taras Shevchenko passed in such a halupe:

Do not call Ïï Raem

Moi There were tears spilled there, 
I'm the first. I do not know 
Is it on the world of Evil, 
That in the House did not lived.]

There were so many of them there, Babkin Rodney, in Dermezone, and in the Pergonovka, and in Kiev "on Naimah", that I never understood how many of them, who I have to: Gopka and Konon, Gann and Nina, Thomas and the young Katya... They sometimes came, the grandmother fed them, gave to whom the old skirt, to whom the moaning goloshes.
Only about the young Katke I realized that she was my cousin. After typhus she fell into dementia, became a beggar, she sat with a bag under the churches, asked for the yards, brought pieces of bread in the bag, the grandfather was hiding and selected for the pigs, Burcha: "Think only, here live these beggars, and how much they serve for Easter!"
I loved her, Katka, she was like a saint, harmless and kind. If she was served with candy, she certainly saved for me, and sometimes on the collected pennies bought on Bazaar me a hotel-clay whistle-horse. I then grew up, and she did not notice it, brought whistles and all something indistinct mumbling, mumbling... She died in the street, quietly and imperceptibly, as the Sparrows perish, she was loaded on a cart and buried somewhere.
Twelve years my grandmother went to the people, nursed other children, was a servant, then became a sling. As I asked, she never wanted to remember her youth or love, maybe because she remembered one thing.
She was completely illiterate. I didn't even know the numbers. Paper money She distinguished by the figure and color, coins-the largest.
Since my mother, the teacher, worked in a school on two shifts and still remained after lessons, I have completely grown up at grandmother. She woke me up, she was sucking, she was feeding, she was making fun of Ukrainian "executions", and all she was drowning, boiled, hindered, pounded, made a pig, chased a cat, bent on the beds, pricked firewood, and she constantly was sick the waist, so that she from time Went to bed, quietly moaning, then rose, and again took up work.
She was soft, loose, with a rough rustic face, always in a grey, old handkerchief or a polka dot scarf.
Like his grandfather, she did not admire the planes and airships, which then flew, on the contrary, they frightened her. Laying me on the stove to sleep, she told me:
"So, when I was little, we would go to the stove, one to one to be babbling, the petty, the bossenic, the starving, as the hearts, and the grandmother our late frightening: you sit quietly, it is still good, and the time will come, a terrible time when the enemy is on the ground, and the whole Earth will swell Wires, and in the sky will fly iron birds and beaks with their iron will peck people, and that will be before the end of the world... 
And we knock the Zubenytami from fear and pray: Do not bring, Lord, to live to that... The Lord did not heed, we lived. Everything happened as the grandmother predicted: both the wire and the birds are iron, and soon, you can see the end of the world...
Probably, in anticipation of his grandmother completely did not care about the material "good", and a lot of handing out for the sake of salvation of the soul. Maybe we would have lived a little better, but the grandmother could not eat it and give it to another. She carried pennies on the church, beggars, then suddenly prepared some transfers to hospitals, acquaintances, neighbours.
The grandfather was out of himself, yelling: "Evil days! Who you feed, we are hungry. " But the grandmother only waved her hand. HID from him, and "evil days" hid in all corners, when the grandfather from work was. In order not to swear or to fall into sin, the grandmother knelt and prayed.
She had many icons. A whole iconostasis in the corner of the room, with a mysterious light bulb, a pinch of incense, bunches of herbs, two wooden crosses-for the grandfather and for her to put in his hands in the coffin-and books-"Gramatkami", where I under her dictation inscribed numerous names Relatives "in health" and "for rest".
In the center there was a strict, exhausted, with a fanatical gaze of the Virgin. Even the baby was like a little angry old man, who says: "It is impossible!" they had such expressive views that if long to watch-the frost was walking on the skin. The icon was in a case under the glass, with a rich gilded salary: some unseen flowers with puzryshkami, bunches of metal berries... And I was terribly anxious to touch these berries, but under the glass they were inaccessible. When the grandmother went to the bazaar, I framed a stool and I was ready to examine these berries for hours, dreaming that when the grandmother dies, I will get to them.
There was an affectionate Nikolay-pleasornik with a blond beard, brave George-Victorious, and on the side stood another virgin-with golden hair and gentle, to the surprise familiar face. She smiled, and the boy on her lap was plump, very contented with life, with the Ymoskami on the naked calf.
And although it was without jewelry, I was really in love with this icon. We have a lot of girls in Kurenevka-blond, soft and tender. They go for the first beauties; Getting married, give birth to such chubby children with Ymoskami, but, unfortunately, quickly fade and grow old. My very first childish love was the image of such a woman with a grandmother's icon, and when then, after the war, I was quite grown, I first of all fell in love with a live girl like that.

My father was a revolutionary and a communist, my mother is a teacher. So when I was born, there was no question of baptism. 
But one day, when the parents went to the service, the grandmother wrapped me in a handkerchief, took me to the Church of Peter and Paul, and there I was thrown into the font. Grandma couldn't let me stay without a paradise after death. The secret of this she opened only when I was ten years old, and remembered that I protested and grabbed a poppa for a beard:
"Here is the hatching, so small, and already at the same with the current Antichrist..."
Under the guidance of the grandmother, however, I was about six years old a religious man. She took me to the Church of Peter and Paul, took communion, put me in front of the icons, took my hand with her brown, wrinkled hand, taught to be baptized and to utter